This video will learn about passing arrays to C++ functions.
We can pass arrays into functions by providing the square brackets in the parameter information.
So in this case we can have a function named print array that expects an array of integers and returns
nothing.
The idea is that this function iterates through the array and displays the array values.
Pretty handy function right.
But arrays are different in C++.
Remember that an array name evaluates to the address or location in memory of the first element of the
array.
In other words the beginning of the array.
So it's being passed into the function is not a copy of the entire array but only the address of the
first element of the array.
That means that the function has no idea how many elements are in the array.
So the programmer doesn't know how many times to iterate.
So when we pass arrays to functions we also need to pass in the size of the array so that we now know
how many times to iterate Let me show you an example
in this example you can see that both the function prototype and the function definition have square
brackets after the formal parameter name.
This tells the compiler that the function expects an array of integers in this case so far so good.
Then in Main I have an array of five integers called my numbers and it's been initialized to the integers
1 through 5.
So I call the print array function and pass in the array.
My numbers are all good so far.
Now I execute the print array function but I have no idea how many times I need to iterate.
Since the array name has no size information I'm stuck.
If the array has a sentinel value like a C-style string then I can iterate until I see that sensible
value.
But in this case the my numbers array has no such Central Valley.
There's no way I can write this function body in a way that it will work with any array of integers.
So the solution is to pass in the size of the array to the function as well.
Let's do that next.
Now we've added a size parameter to both the function prototype and the function definition in the main.
When I call the function I pass in my numbers and the size of the array which is 5.
In this case.
Now when I execute the body of the printer a function I know the location of the array which is the
array name.
And I know how many elements are in the array.
I can easily write a for loop now that iterates through the array and displays every integer.
This looks great but there is one potential gotcha that you need to be aware of.
Since we're passing into the function the location of the actual array that was declared in main that
means that we can modify that actual array from within the function.
This could be useful in the case of a function like zero array that we can call whenever we want to
zero all the elements in an array.
However in the printer a function we don't want to modify the array.
If we do it's probably an unintentional error.
We'll see how to protect ourselves from this kind of error in the next line.
But first let's see how we could write a useful function like zero array.
In this case the zero array function receives the location of the array and the size of the array.
We could simply iterate through the array and set each array element to zero.
Notice that when we print the array in Main after we call 0 array all the array elements are now 0.
So let's get back to see what we can do to have the compiler help us so we don't change an array we
don't want to we can define function parameters as Konst parameters.
This tells the compiler that these parameters are read only within the function body.
Any attempt to modify them will result in the compiler.
So in this case notice that we included the Konst keyword ret before the array parameter declaration.
That's it.
Now if I try to modify any array element as I do in the assignment statement a compiler error will occur
depending on your compiler the error message will say something like error trying to assign to a read
only value.
The idea of passing the location of a variable to a function instead of the value of a variable is fundamental
in understanding the next topic will talk about.
It's called pass by reference before we talk about pass by reference I want to be sure that you really
understand the whole idea of passing arrays to functions.
So I mean the ID and I mean the section 11 workspace the arrays and functions project.
And let me show you what I've got here.
Let's start at the main.
I've got a real simple array here array of integers called my scores and I've initialized it to 198
1986 and 84 five integers.
Now what I want to do is I want to call a function called Print array and I want to pass into that function
the array and the size of the array as we saw before.
Perfect.
That should print out 198 1986 and 84.
Now I've got a function called Set array.
And what this function will do is it'll set every value of that array to 100.
So when I come back it'll print out one hundred five times so that will actually modify the array.
So let's see what these functions look like they're pretty straightforward.
Are the function prototypes.
That's the function prototype for print to expect an array of integers and the size of the array the
cellaret function expects an array of integers the size of the array and the value that we want to set
each one of those elements too.
All right.
So let's look at the print array and I put Konst here because it's it's something that we need to think
about whenever we write functions that work with the race.
So let's look at this.
What are we doing here.
Well we iterate we iterate for equal to zero.
While it is less than size that's the idiom that we do all the time when we're working with arrays and
we're incrementing by one and then all I'm doing is I'm outputting a race of I.
So I'm going to go from a race of zero race of one race of two all the way to a race.
For in this case and I'm going to print out each one of those integers then I'm just going to print
a new line at the n that will print out 198 1986 and 84 perfect.
So that's that line right here.
Then I'm going to call cellaret and when you pass in again the array the 5 which is the size and 100.
In this case rather than doing any outputting what I want to do is I want to loop through that array
again so the same loop from equal zero.
I less than size by 1.
What I want to do it each iteration of the loop is I want to set a r r so I write the element of that
array to the value that was passed in.
So in this case I'm modifying all five of the array integers to 100.
Then I'm printing it again.
So what I expect from this program is the first print array statement is going to print 198 1986 and
84 then the last print array statement here is going to print 5 100s.
OK.
So let's run this and then we'll walk through this in detail so you can see exactly what's going on.
There you go 198.
1986 84 and then 500 is exactly what we expected.
So let's walk through this.
Let's start with the printer array function first.
And my main has that array right here called my scores and I'm going to draw this visually so he can
see exactly what's going on.
There's my scores.
It's an array of five integers.
Can I put them in here one hundred ninety eight.
Ninety.
86 in 84 the value of the name of an array is the location of that first element in the array.
So let's say that that integer 100 here is that location 2000.
And I'm just making that up.
It could be any location that's 2000.
So whenever the C++ compiler sees an array name.
This is what it's going at.
In this case my scores will evaluate to two thousand.
Okay perfect.
So now I'm going to call printf array right here.
This is what's going on.
So now I'm in my printer array function and print array has several local variables.
It's got array.
It's got size and it's got this I right there.
Let's just worry about the array and the size variables right now.
So there's my A R R I'll just call it array.
And here's my size.
When the function is called the values are copied.
So my scores is two thousand.
It's not the entire array.
It's 2000 so 2000 gets copied over here.
Size is the 5.
So size it's the 5.
Right now I start looping and the first thing I do is it says basically 0.
Right.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to see out a r r Sub-Zero.
Well what does that mean.
That means the first integer in the array.
Where where is the array right here.
That's that guy right there.
So you can see that this print array function is referring to the actual array in Main because the array
was never copied.
Instead the address of the array was passed in it's going to go through each one of these through the
loop.
It's going to print A-R some one which is that guy right there 98.
So it's going to display them all OK that makes sense.
I hope so so.
So again this will print out right here it will display one hundred ninety eight just like we saw 90
86 and 84.
Now let's look at this function call right here.
I still have my my scores array and it's still the same I haven't changed it.
And when we put those numbers back in here.
Put a 100 in here.
98 90 86 in 84 right now I call cellaret.
Well said array is over here.
And it's got same idea right.
It's got the A-R variable the size and the value.
So it's got a r r It's got size and it's got value.
Let's again assume that this is addressed 2000 right here.
That's that name.
So in this case I'm passing in the 2000 I'm passing and five for size and I'm passing the 100 for the
value and then I'm looping and notice that loop every time in the loop this is what I'm doing right
here.
So the first time through I'm saying are Sub-Zero is value which is 100 is always going to be 100.
Well where is your Sub-Zero.
It's at 2000.
So what I just did was I just came in here and put a 100 in here then I'm going to increment I and it
becomes a r so one equals 100.
So this guys over here.
I just got rid of that one.
And what I'm doing is I'm initializing the entire array to whatever value was passed in which is 100
in this case.
Right.
When this function is finished it's gone.
And what I'm left with is the updated array.
So this will print out five 100s as you saw OK.
So hopefully that makes sense it's really different from pass by volume.
But when you think about it it is still doing pass by value because it's copying the value of 2000.
Right.
It's not copying the entire array but it's copying 2000 which is what my scores defaults to that's its
value.
All right.
So one last thing.
We really don't want to be able to change that array in the print array.
Let's say that we did something like this.
Something really silly we could say are our Sub-Zero is 10000 or you know what I see.
Fifty thousand just so that we could really see the difference.
This is probably a bug.
A print functions don't tend to change anything they just display information.
But let's just say that we've got some bug in our code now right here.
I'll call it print or array again you know I'll call it exactly the same with my scores and five.
So look what happened here.
I called print to read here it printed out the five hundreds but then it changed.
One of them the first one to 50000.
And then I'm calling it again.
So I'm expecting to see that first.
There it is you see that first array element right there just get changed to 50000.
How do I prevent that.
Real easy way to prevent that is to come up to your printer re math function right here and say that
this is a constant array and I can do the same thing in the definition.
Now if you try to compile this.
There's your assignment of read only location A-R.
So in other words this function now print array cannot change array.
That's really what we want.
So we can comment that out and now overrun it just fine.
You can't notice that's exactly what we want.
So when you're writing functions and they're passing around objects especially arrays and vectors and
things like that especially when we talk about pass by reference in the next section you've got to be
really aware of what can change what and if you do have access to the actual.
And you don't want to change it.
Konst is the way to go.
OK we'll talk more about that when we talk about pass by reference.